data/blog/mdx-quick-reference.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Does JavaScript Promise.all() run in parallel or sequential?'
date: '2023-09-04'
lastmod: '2024-11-11'
tags: ['javascript', 'promise', 'parallel', 'sequential', 'concurrently']
summary: "JavaScript is a single-threaded programming language, so it can't run multiple things at the same time, Promise.all() actually runs promises concurrently, not in parallel!. Let's dive in to see how it works."
images:
  [
    '/static/images/banners/long-straight-road-with-trees-on-the-side__karsten_wuerth__rafblRbne3o.jpeg',
  ]
authors: ['default']
draft : true
---

## Introduction

This **word** is bold. This <em>word</em> is italic.

<ins>underline</ins>
## Application Issues

From medium to large-scale applications, challenges like architecture maintenance and scalability hinder progress. So, What challenges typically arise as an application scales from medium to large size ?

### Lack of common architecture

When it comes to developing applications, one of the persistent challenges developers encounter is the absence of a common, standardized architecture.

- **Maintenance Challenges**: With diverse architectural choices, maintaining and updating applications becomes arduous.

- **Code Quality and Readability**: Inconsistent architectures often result in code that's hard to follow.

- **Collaboration Hurdles**: When each developer follows their preferred architectural pattern, collaboration among team members becomes cumbersome.

### Weakness structure

- **Code Reusability**: Without predefined patterns or modules, developers often face hurdles when attempting to reuse code across different sections of the application.

- **Non-standard Type Validation**: Avoid conducting validation prior to storing data in the database or validating the data received from the API.
### Hyperlinks 

1. Standard links in which both the label and URL are defined together:

[label](http://example.com)

2. Reference links, which can be in one of two forms:

[label][key] or [key]

[key]: http://example.com

3.Automatic Links, where the label is the URL:

### Scalability problem

As projects grow, the absence of a common architecture can hinder scalability. Without standardized patterns, scaling applications becomes intricate, leading to poor performance.

### Comments 

## Conclusion

In conclusion, our exploration of challenges in medium to large-scale application development underscores the critical need for standardized architecture.

In the next post, I will introduce **NestJS**. This framework can help you address the issues mentioned earlier: **NestJS**, a robust **NodeJS framework**, proves instrumental in addressing issues such as maintenance complexities, weak structures, and scalability hurdles.

> Sunset over the mountains on a serene evening.

Let's say you have a list of async tasks (each return a **Promise**).

```js:promises.js showLineNumbers
let promise1 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
let promise2 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
let promise3 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
```

What would you choose to run them?

Awaiting each promise one by one:

```js showLineNumbers
await promise1()
await promise2()
await promise3()
// do other stuff
```

Or run them all at once:

```js showLineNumbers
await Promise.all([promise1(), promise2(), promise3()])
// do other stuff
```

The first approach is running them **sequentially**, one after another. It means that the next promise will start only after the previous one is resolved.

Like this:

```js:promise-hell.js showLineNumbers
promise1().then(() => {
  promise2().then(() => {
    promise3().then(() => {
      // do other stuff
    })
  })
})
```

The second approach is well-known as running them in **"parallel"**, meaning that all promises will start at the same time.
It's useful when you don't need to wait for the previous promise to be resolved before starting the next one.

But does it really run in parallel (or all at once)? <Twemoji emoji="thinking-face" />

The answer is no. JavaScript is single-threaded programming language, so it can't run multiple things at the exact same time (except for some circumstances such as [web workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers).)
`Promise.all()` actually runs them concurrently, not in parallel!

What's the difference?

## Concurrent programming vs Parallel programming

> TL;DR: Concurrent programming is about dealing with a lot of things at once, while parallel programming is about doing a lot of things at once.

See also this excellent explanation from [Haskell wiki](https://wiki.haskell.org/Parallelism_vs._Concurrency).

A dead-simple example for a 9-year-old kid:

- **Concurrency**: 2 lines of customers ordering food from a single cashier (lines take turns ordering).
- **Parallelism**: 2 lines of customers ordering food at the same time from 2 cashiers.

As so, what `Promise.all()` does is, it adds the promises to an event loop queue and calls them all together.
But it waits for each one to resolve before moving on.
`Promise.all` will stop if the first promise rejects, unless you handle the error yourself (e.g. with `.catch()`).

That's the major difference between concurrent and parallel, with _concurrent execution_, promises run one after another but don't have to wait for previous ones to end. They make progress at the same time.
In contrast, _parallel execution_ runs promises at the exact same time in separate processes.
This allows them to progress completely separately at their own speed.

## Conclusion

The answer for the question in the title is: `Promise.all()` runs concurrently, all promises execute almost at the same time, but not in parallel.

If you have a list promises that don't depend on each other, you can run them concurrently (or parallel-like):

```js:concurrently.js showLineNumbers
await Promise.all([promise1(), promise2(), promise3()])
// or
await Promise.all(
  items.map(async (item) => {
    await doSomething(item)
  })
)
```

Or sequentially:

```js:sequentially.js showLineNumbers
for (let item of items) {
  await doSomething(item)
}
```

## References

- [`Promise.all()` documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all)
- [Parallelism vs. Concurrency](https://wiki.haskell.org/Parallelism_vs._Concurrency)
- [JavaScript Event Loop structure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop)

Happy promise-ing! <Twemoji emoji="clinking-beer-mugs" />

Commit message:

mdx quick reference and  Gen AI

data/blog/mdx-quick-reference.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Markdown cheatsheet'
date: '2023-12-01'
lastmod: '2024-12-01'
tags: ['mdx', 'markdown', 'syntax','fomat','output']
summary: "JavaScript is a single-threaded programming language, so it can't run multiple things at the same time, Promise.all() actually runs promises concurrently, not in parallel!. Let's dive in to see how it works."
images:
  [
    '/static/images/banners/long-straight-road-with-trees-on-the-side__karsten_wuerth__rafblRbne3o.jpeg',
  ]
authors: ['default']
draft : true
---

## Introduction

| **Fomat Name**         | **Syntax**                               | **Output**
| --------           | -------                              |-------
| Bold               | This `**word\**` is bold             |This **word** is bold.
| Italic             | This `<em>word</em>` is italic       |This <em>word</em> is italic
| Underline          | This `<ins>word</ins>` is underlined |This <ins>word</ins> is underlined 
| Underline          | This `<ins>word</ins>` is underlined |This <ins>word</ins> is underlined 
| Hyperlink-1        | `[label](http://example.com)`        |[Google](http://google.com)
| Hyperlink-2        | `[key]: http://example.com`          |[Google URL]: http://google.com
| Image              | `![Gen AI](/static/images/blogs/gen-ai.png)` |![Gen AI](/static/images/blogs/gen-ai.png)
| Comments        | `\| This is a comment and will not be part of the `DOM` and hence it will be empty on the browser \|`         | |This is a comment and will not be part of the DOM  and hence it will be empty on the browser| | 

--------------------------------------------
[comment]::dsdsd
[comment]: # ( Happy reading! <Twemoji emoji="clinking-beer-mugs" /> )

## Application Issues

|  A |B   |c   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|  1 |  2 | 4  |   |   |
|   5| 6  |   |   |   |
|   |   |   |   |   |


### Lack of common architecture

When it comes to developing applications, one of the persistent challenges developers encounter is the absence of a common, standardized architecture.

- **Maintenance Challenges**: With diverse architectural choices, maintaining and updating applications becomes arduous.

- **Code Quality and Readability**: Inconsistent architectures often result in code that's hard to follow.

- **Collaboration Hurdles**: When each developer follows their preferred architectural pattern, collaboration among team members becomes cumbersome.

### Weakness structure

- **Code Reusability**: Without predefined patterns or modules, developers often face hurdles when attempting to reuse code across different sections of the application.

- **Non-standard Type Validation**: Avoid conducting validation prior to storing data in the database or validating the data received from the API.

In conclusion, our exploration of challenges in medium to large-scale application development underscores the critical need for standardized architecture.

In the next post, I will introduce **NestJS**. This framework can help you address the issues mentioned earlier: **NestJS**, a robust **NodeJS framework**, proves instrumental in addressing issues such as maintenance complexities, weak structures, and scalability hurdles.

> Sunset over the mountains on a serene evening.

Let's say you have a list of async tasks (each return a **Promise**).

```js:promises.js showLineNumbers
let promise1 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
let promise2 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
let promise3 = async function () {
  /* ... */
}
```

What would you choose to run them?

Awaiting each promise one by one:

```js showLineNumbers
await promise1()
await promise2()
await promise3()
// do other stuff
```

Or run them all at once:

```js showLineNumbers
await Promise.all([promise1(), promise2(), promise3()])
// do other stuff
```

The first approach is running them **sequentially**, one after another. It means that the next promise will start only after the previous one is resolved.

Like this:

```js:promise-hell.js showLineNumbers
promise1().then(() => {
  promise2().then(() => {
    promise3().then(() => {
      // do other stuff
    })
  })
})
```

The second approach is well-known as running them in **"parallel"**, meaning that all promises will start at the same time.
It's useful when you don't need to wait for the previous promise to be resolved before starting the next one.

But does it really run in parallel (or all at once)?

The answer is no. JavaScript is single-threaded programming language, so it can't run multiple things at the exact same time (except for some circumstances such as [web workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers).)
`Promise.all()` actually runs them concurrently, not in parallel!

What's the difference?

## Concurrent programming vs Parallel programming

> TL;DR: Concurrent programming is about dealing with a lot of things at once, while parallel programming is about doing a lot of things at once.

See also this excellent explanation from [Haskell wiki](https://wiki.haskell.org/Parallelism_vs._Concurrency).

A dead-simple example for a 9-year-old kid:

- **Concurrency**: 2 lines of customers ordering food from a single cashier (lines take turns ordering).
- **Parallelism**: 2 lines of customers ordering food at the same time from 2 cashiers.

As so, what `Promise.all()` does is, it adds the promises to an event loop queue and calls them all together.
But it waits for each one to resolve before moving on.
`Promise.all` will stop if the first promise rejects, unless you handle the error yourself (e.g. with `.catch()`).

That's the major difference between concurrent and parallel, with _concurrent execution_, promises run one after another but don't have to wait for previous ones to end. They make progress at the same time.
In contrast, _parallel execution_ runs promises at the exact same time in separate processes.
This allows them to progress completely separately at their own speed.

## Conclusion

The answer for the question in the title is: `Promise.all()` runs concurrently, all promises execute almost at the same time, but not in parallel.

If you have a list promises that don't depend on each other, you can run them concurrently (or parallel-like):

```js:concurrently.js showLineNumbers
await Promise.all([promise1(), promise2(), promise3()])
// or
await Promise.all(
  items.map(async (item) => {
    await doSomething(item)
  })
)
```

Or sequentially:

```js:sequentially.js showLineNumbers
for (let item of items) {
  await doSomething(item)
}
```

## References

- [`Promise.all()` documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all)
- [Parallelism vs. Concurrency](https://wiki.haskell.org/Parallelism_vs._Concurrency)
- [JavaScript Event Loop structure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/EventLoop)
